
by J. Elmer Rhodes Jr. (1950–1995)

If I was not born a railroad buff, I became one soon after.  Early
memories that are warm, that to this day bring an inner glow upon
recall, are mostly railroad memories.

One could not see the tracks nor, usually, the trains from our house
for foliage and other obstructions; but at night the locomotive fire
would shine upwards behind the cab roof and light up the steam and smoke
streaming overhead every time the fire door opened.  For trains outbound
east, climbing the three- or four-mile grade from the valley floor to the
cut through Red Mountain at Irondale, the fire door opened every few
seconds, as the fireman rhythmically shoveled coal.  As he came forward
with the scoop of coal his foot operated a treadle that supplied air to
open the fire doors.

From the trackside, just a block up or down the street, one could see
the fireman straddling, one foot on the cab floor of the engine, the
other on the tender.  The timing of his motions and the fire door’s
opening were rhythms I had learned well, so I sensed the swinging of the
shovel even when the thing observed was a flash on the smoke and steam
half a mile away.

On earlier, smaller locomotives, the fireman could swing open the fire
door from time to time to tend the fire, but the engines grew so big
that by the time of my childhood the fireman was the bottleneck in power
production; the treadle-operated door was absolutely necessary.
Southern’s 4700 series of freight locomotives, and equally big units on
the Seaboard, had been in operation some ten years at that time.

I know not whether it occurred in a very short span of time or over
several years, but the time came when I realized that there was no more
rhythmical illumination of the sky when trains went out at night;
stokers had relieved firemen of the dogged shoveling required to keep up
steam.


Father grew up with a romantic attachment to railroading, and he did not
lose it until his last years when all interests were past.  In 1913 and,
later, during the First World War, he put in some months at the
exhausting task of fireman on Southern’s 4500’s.  In recent
years I learned from Aunt Ethel that during those times he lost weight,
became lean and gaunt.  His superlative for body-breaking manual labor
was “like firing a jack.”

Engineers he had fired for were pointed out to me as they brought trains
in or took them out; “Hustler” O’Dell was a remote and lordly being as
he leaned out the cab window to better view the road ahead, while
pulling his whistle strap with his left hand; he was all concentration
on the job of getting his train over the road.  Only seldom would he be
diverted sufficiently to raise his gloved right hand in an attenuated
wave.

Father’s romantic view was not uncommon for boys of his time, and it was
reinforced by such delicious pleasures as being carried to Montgomery
from Georgiana on the engine by Cousin Jeff Hudson.  Father's joy must
have equaled that expressed by Walter Chrysler over riding the engine
with his father: “At the end of the day a boy’s face would be sore from
constant and incessant grinning.”

Father’s love affair with railroads was early communicated to me through
his reminiscences, and this was reinforced by the proximity of the
tracks — Seaboard, one long block to the south; one block north, two
double tracks of AGS, to Chattanooga, and Southern, to Atlanta.  The
last also carried Central of Georgia trains to Leeds, where they took
their own track to Columbus, Georgia.  Father’s watch has a dent in the
back, put there by the shaker bar of 4563.  Fire grates were in four
sections.  A fireman could not shake all the grates at once.  A three or
four foot steel bar would be fitted over each of four stub levers in
succession.  Each stub was linked to its section of the grates under the
fire.  He had heaved the bar against the breast pocket of his overalls,
the pocket containing his watch.

There were stories of adventure out on the road and in the yards.  “You
would have to read every one of those lights to bring a train in here,”
he would say to me, a small child,
as we drove across the end of the AGS or Seaboard marshalling yards at
night, and the hundreds of colored switch lights made a Christmas tree
of the yard.  There was a locomotive that one night quietly backed out
of the Finley roundhouse, unmanned, and was rolling for the cinder pits
down the hill, where men were working.  Father, on his way to work,
boarded it, climbed into the dark cab, and took it back to a roundhouse.
(No air was up for brakes, but steam was up, and with it Father stopped
the locomotive, and drove it forward.)
The foreman had not missed it!

No Negro was promoted to engineer in those days, but there were a fair
number of Colored firemen, and they were good ones, Father judged.  They
were bred to hard labor, and they had a knack for keeping a hot fire.
But they liked to make lots of black smoke, Father said.  And out on
the road they would work like fury, shovelling coal, shaking grates,
putting water into the boiler.  This to be ready, when they rolled
through a town, to jump up onto the box beside the window, and lean way
out on the left elbow, intent on the road ahead.  I think I would have
done so too.  It was not just the Colored firemen.

Maybe several stories got compounded into one epic run to Atlanta from
Birmingham with eighty cars of mules.  World War I was going on; a ship
was ready to sail from Savannah as soon as this trainload of mules,
which had come in from the west, was
loaded.  The dispatcher gave them the road; orders were to make only
necessary stops for water and coal.

But people on epic journeys are always tried with difficulties.  As the
last tipple-car of coal hit the tender, a chain snapped, and a ton of
coal was dumped into the gangway.  Several chains would be strung across
the front of the tender to hold the coal when the tender was full; they
would be taken down when enough coal had been used so that the rest
stayed in the tender by itself.

No time to fix that; Hustler O’Dell had gone over his engine, and was
growling that he wanted the gauge to read 210 pounds all night long.
(Because of the urgency of the run, Father and O’Dell must have been on
the engine before the hostlers were through preparing it.)

They coupled up, tried the brakes, and moved out of the yard
through the dusk.  O’Dell could keep his drivers torqued within a hair
of slipping, and never loose hold.  They moved out fast, then up the
long grade to the cut through the mountain.  Father fought furiously to
keep up steam, and between each shovel-full into the firebox, he would
throw another off onto the trackside.  “I knew that if there were coal
in the gangway when he turned down the mountain, I would be unable to
stand up.”

He got the coal out from underfoot, but he still could not stand up when
they rocketed down grade, up to eighty miles per hour he judged.  He
hung onto grab-irons, and tried to tend water and do other tasks that it
was possible to do with one hand.  Maybe there were not many miles like
this, but those miles were memorable.  The route is a crooked one:  one
hundred and sixty-nine miles, one hundred and sixty-nine curves.

Water taken in haste; coal taken impatiently at Anniston and at Waco,
where the fire was cleaned of clinkers by Colored laborers.  No turning
into sidetracks; all traffic in both directions sidetracked for Father,
for O’Dell, for eighty cars of mules.

They steamed into Inman Yard in just five hours, passenger train time in
those days.  Another crew and engine must have gotten the train to
Savannah (on another railroad), and the mules must have gotten to
France.


Not just stories; there was the glory of the thing itself.  A fast
passenger train braking to a stop, downhill at Woodlawn in the winter
dusk:  ten cars, sixty car wheels, on my side of the train, rimmed with
fire.  The immensity of a steam locomotive, and the massive tasks it
accomplished, were awesome, and all the machinery was out where you
could see it.  An accident led to my being able to observe the machinery
at low speed for several years, as will be recounted below.  A nail on
the track would be flattened, and knocked off by the pony trucks of the
locomotive, but the nail would still be hot after the train had passed,
if it was a fast passenger train.  The open, nearly flat area where the
railroad parallels Fifth Avenue south between 56th and 57th Streets was
a good place to do such impressive blacksmithing.

Nails crossed on the track would be welded together, too.

There was, besides romance, anxiety and the constant near presence of
death, for the crew and for the unwary who tangled with a train.  When I
was a small child, I vividly recall Cousin Ellen, Jeff’s widow, telling
of the terrible moan in the night of the wrecker whistle, calling its
crew, while her Jeff was somewhere out on the road.  She had owned a big
house in Montgomery near the railroad yards, and she may have boarded
railroad men.

Neighbor, Clarence Allgood, lost a leg when he tried to board a moving
freight train right down the street.  Our maid, Ella, had worked for the
Allgoods, and lived in their servant house, at the time.  It was close to
home, although I never knew Clarence, who became a well known
Birmingham attorney.

The aunt of schoolmate, later scout-mate, Ted Bumann was walking one
summer morning north on 56th Street, dressed to catch the street car and
go to town.  She crossed the Southern tracks, and as she traversed the
hundred feet to the AGS tracks, she speeded up to a fast walk or half
run, apparently to get across the AGS tracks ahead of a passenger train
from Chattanooga.  She misjudged.  In the middle of the track she threw
up her hands in horror.  My mother saw the body tumble beside the train
120 feet past the crossing.  Mother had been waiting in her car for the
train to pass.  I heard the story many times, including the time it was
told to a railroad agent who investigated the accident.

A bad accident involving a train and a street car at a flagged crossing
had many consequences.  It occurred three short blocks from home at Grand
Avenue (now First Avenue South).  For days the neighborhood ladies told
and retold of the terrible mutilation.  It was generally thought that
the accident spelled the end of the “Tidewater” street railway line.
(A projected interurban: Birmingham, Tidewater & Coast.  It ran from East
Lake to Bessemer, and had ambitions to go on to Tuscaloosa and beyond.)
They soon sold out to their competitor, BR&P Co., who did some
rerouting.  Their hardy cars carried me to college on the South East
Lake line twelve to sixteen years later.

Another consequence of the accident was that by ordinance or agreement,
trains and street cars thereafter stopped at all grade crossings where
the two met.  Rerouting of street cars took care of the crossing where
the accident had occurred, but for several years, until an overpass was
built, Seaboard trains stopped at Grand Avenue (now Fifth Avenue South)
about 52nd Street.  Outbound trains were on the long grade that took
them over Red Mountain, and heavy freights had a difficult time getting
underway after the stop; they never picked up much speed until they
crossed the ridge three miles beyond.

A regular freight stopped at the crossing about 6:15 AM.  It would only
be travelling at walking speed half a mile after getting under way and
leaving the crossing.  Sometimes for a block, sometimes for a mile, I
would walk beside the driving wheels, admiring the valve linkage, the
oily brass piston and valve rods, and the forged steel I-beam that was
the driving rod.  To earn a hiking merit badge I had to log five miles
of walking a day for several months.  During this interval I was often
out before breakfast to roam the mountainside woods, and I would wait
for this train at the head of 55th Place.  The reverse lever must have
been hard forward, as every exhaust was an explosion.

Another seaboard freight fought its way up that hill every evening
about 8:20.  Lots of men were riding freights during the Depression, and
nearly every night two detectives would scan the slowly moving train
with flashlights.  They would station themselves on the banks on both
sides of the track at 55th Street.  If a rider were discovered, they
would board the train and take him off; or he would jump off and run,
and they would pursue him.  They caught one in Mr. Batcheller’s corn
patch at 56th Street once.  I do not know whether they were free-lance
deputies, who got a fee for each arrest, or whether they were railroad
employees discouraging hobos because cars had been broken into, or coal
thrown off loaded cars.  To me, this was just an act to watch, the most
interesting thing being the boarding and dismounting of the moving
train.  (Clarence Allgood’s story must have gotten to me; I never had
the slightest urge to board one.)  But Father knew the brutal reputation
of railroad detectives; and, whenever ’bos would stop at our door for a
handout (and there were many), he would warn them where the dicks were
likely to be.

During the early thirties an occasional exhibition train pulled by a
Diesel locomotive would come through, usually pulling three shiny light
passenger cars.  Father would pooh-pooh the preposterous notion that one
of those “street cars” would ever pull a freight train.  “Why, I’ve seen
a Mack truck nearly tear itself up moving one freight car around the
lumber yard.”  An internal combustion engine would never do what steam
could do.  “Imagine what the clutch would have to be.”

Then one day — about 1945 — I saw steam die.  These were war years, and
steam locomotives would haul trains millions of miles more, but steam
was doomed, I knew.  Father and I were in an auto stopped at the grade
crossing at 56th Street.  An outbound southern freight was stopped with
its Diesel engines across our road.  Freight cars trailed down the grade
behind the locomotives; the end was out of sight around a long curve
that started half a mile away.  Ready to go:  the board just ahead
changed; the engines revved up; a sense of tautness appeared in the
trucks, and in three or four seconds the locomotives began to creep
forward up the mountain.  Father’s mouth dropped open as he watched that
string of cars.  There was no slack in the train!  And it started off up
the grade!  To start under such circumstances, he was used to backing
the engine down to move each drawhead as far as it would go into each
car frame member.  Draft is transferred from the couple to the carframe
through two forged horizontal protrusions on the drawhead; they pass
through reinforced holes in a box girder of the car frame.  (Fancier,
hydraulic-cushioned couples are available now.)  “Slack” came from play
of the protrusions in the holes, and play in the couple itself.  After
backing down, the engine would start up with no load, and every time it
moved forward an inch, say, it would snatch one more car forward.  With
a dramatic “h-r-r-r-umph,” the wave would rocket back the
train.  This long train started upgrade with no slack.  Father stared
while several freight cars moved past in front of us, then he weakly
whispered, “He’s pulling the whole yard out behind him.”


About 1946 a man close to the Association of American Railroads told me
there was not a single order outstanding for a steam locomotive to be
delivered in this country.  I knew it was coming, but this was faster
than I had expected.  (Baldwin Locomotive Works did not expect the
change so soon, either.  They went under soon after, apparently because
they stuck to steam too long.  It is sad to see a company over a hundred
years old go down.)

It has been sad, too, to see the opportunities that railroad management
has missed over the years.  Since before 1900 railroads have preferred
the freight business, and their innovation and the development of
rolling stock, signaling, and data handling have been spectacular.
Billions were invested in locomotives, freight yards and other capital
items in the years following World War II.

Father, as a boy, paddled a boat for colorful and irascible L&N
president Milton Smith, when he would come to fish in the millpond at
Rhodes’ Mill.  Smith said then that he would as soon never run another
passenger train.

There was enough public feeling of romance about railroading to have
created the foundation of public support that any far-flung enterprise
has to have.  But railroads, in their ephemeral might, did not know it
was necessary, and scorned passengers, their best opportunity for
constructive contact with the public.  Freight customers do not
constitute the public.

No innovations made it easy to buy a ticket.  Seldom was it evident that
a train crew gave a hoot about maintaining a schedule, and too, too often,
trainmen were adverse to common courtesy to their passengers, their
customers.

The latent public support, waiting and wanting to be ignited, was
evident on an L&N train, hours late, southbound to Birmingham during
World War II.  Passengers got the notion that the trainmen were intent
on making up all the lost time they possibly could.  (It is more likely
that a manifest freight was on their heels.)  The engineer had a clear
road to practice that intent.  Passengers were thrown from the aisle
when they tried to go to the water fountain or the rest room.  Were they
angered by this?  They were not.  When a large man landed in a lady’s
lap, both laughed, and he climbed up to try again.  At the end of that
run those passengers would have cheered in a mighty voice for the L&N
Railroad.  A little sincere care for the traveling public and the nation
would have cheered, too.  But such care was carefully withheld.

What might-have-been could be glimpsed in the B&O operation in the north
end of Baltimore, even during wartime.  You could sit in summer clothes
on padded wicker benches on the concourse of their Mount Royal Station
and cleanly board your train or meet incoming passengers.  All freight
north, as well as passenger trains, traversed that roofed concourse.
Coal-burning steam locomotives powered their trains, but they were
pulled through the tunnels of the city and this concourse by electric
locomotives; their coal fires would be banked.  Two blocks away was the
Pennsylvania Station.  There, trains were hauled by those wonderful
electric GG1’s, inherently clean locomotives.  But one felt unclean
after walking through their station.

My brother-in-law Jim Hard
got to the core of the problem by recognizing that passenger
and freight were two entirely different businesses, retail and
wholesale, respectively.  Both used tracks and locomotives, but the two
businesses needed separate personnel and management.  A middle-aged
conductor “promoted” to passenger service, after years in a caboose, was
unlikely to be able to satisfactorily meet the public.

Some years ago, since World War II, a monument was dedicated at the
burial place in Tennessee of “Casey”
(John Luther) Jones.  Mrs. Jones was there;
their son, a GM&O engineer, was there; Sim Webb, Casey's Colored fireman
on 382, was there.

The president of the IC refused to participate
because Casey had wrecked their locomotive.
How little understanding can a man have?
